Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Captain Gerald Roop is a proud Oakey who has lived in the Brazos Valley for the better part of 38 years, a sound officer in World War II.
And what's a sound officer?
Well, there's a good chance that like me, you don't know about sound and flash, but you will find out that his was not a large unit, but quite a valuable one that put itself deeply in harm's way through combat at the Battle of the Bulge and other resistance in their march through France and into Germany.
Welcome Captain Gerald Roop to Veterans of the Valley.
You grew up in Oklahoma.
You are a proud Okie.
You, Oklahoma class of 1942, and it didn't take long after graduation that you were in the service in January of 43.
I want to get right into what is sound and flash, Captain Root, because a lot of people might not be familiar with this really sort of survey operation of World War II.
What's sound and flash?
Sound and flash, Tom, is the common name given to a field artillery observation battalion.
There are two batteries, each made up of one sound platoon and one flash platoon.
And just as the name implies, sound, actually the purpose of the unit is to locate enemy artillery.
Sound basically means that you put six microphones out about a mile apart over a five mile area.
Then you connect these to a machine in the command post.
We have an operator out front who pushes a button when a shell goes over and it activates the machine and prints out on tape the time that each microphone received the burst.
Amazing.
Since these are plotted by survey on a plotting board, you can figure the difference in time that each shell hit the microphone and back plot to locate the source of the sound or the gun.
And if you get enough of these...
over a period of time, then you'll know that you have a good plot and the information is given to the Corps.
We were Corps troops.
And then they would fire and try to
eliminate the gun.
Exactly.
Basically, that's it.
This was really high-tech for this time.
I mean, it sounds high-tech to me right now, but this was high-tech for this time, extremely, wasn't it?
Very much so.
Of course, it's pretty primitive now, considering the way things are done.
Now, 1,600 yards apart, the reason for that, because that had to do with the speed of sound between the microphones, is that right?
Approximately.
You put them four sound seconds apart, and sound generally travels around 400 yards per second, depending on a lot of factors.
But you spread them far enough that you could cover a wide area.
But they had to be as far forward as you could put them, which put the survey crews that put in the Mikes in danger, because they were quite out a lot of times in the open, and the OPs, the outposts, were up with the infantry outpost, so Mike
Command post had to, of course, be as far forward as it could be because you had to run a line from each microphone back to the CP.
So it was a little bit of an arduous situation.
Exactly.
Now, that was sound, and that was your specialty as a sound officer.
But explain what flash was.
All right.
Flash is just as the word says.
You set up two optical instruments at a certain distance part.
You measure the distance between them.
generally in a church steeple or a high building or someplace where they can see.
And most of it was done at night, although they could see flashes during the daytime.
Both OPs would zero in on a flash, and by trigonometry, since you knew the distance between the two and the angles, you had the angle at the apex, so you could locate the source of the gun.
So all those students taking trigonometry and wondering, what are we taking this for?
It certainly came in handy as far as this particular operation in World War II.
Exactly.
Right.
OP, of course, that's your outpost.
CP, that's your command post.
Command post.
I want to move on because you went on to Camp Gordon, Georgia, and you started this new Sound and Flash unit in 1944, went overseas in September of 1944.
Let's talk about that because you landed at Omaha Beach.
This was about three months after, of course, D-Day.
But sort of talk about what Omaha Beach and Normandy was like three months later.
All right.
Initially, we landed at Liverpool, took a train to Southampton,
and got on a boat and went directly across the channel to Omaha Beach.
There wasn't anything there except the wrecked buildings, the concrete gun emplacements the Germans had had.
I never asked the colonel why, but I think he wanted the honor of maybe landing on Omaha Beach.
But we did.
And I thought, gee, they must need us pretty bad because here we are a week after we landed,
back in France.
Well, we sat there for six weeks waiting for our equipment to arrive.
Right there at the Cherbourg Peninsula, waiting for the equipment.
So you sort of cooled your heels there for a while, right?
In the mud and the rain, yes.
Late October of 1944, though, you were in combat, and we're talking about the wintertime, and we start talking about the Battle of the Bulge.
The people I have visited with that were involved in the Battle of the Bulge, the first thing they talk about is the weather, the bitter, bitter cold.
Talk about your memories of that.
Well, the cold weather really didn't start until
About the time of the bulge, about the 16th of December to be exact.
But during that time, we had moved, the army had moved up to the edge of Germany.
And of course, everybody was optimistic.
You know, we're going to be in Berlin by Christmas.
Well, it didn't work that way.
The Germans and the weather turned out to be a key factor.
So it snowed and got cold and was miserable.
It was the coldest winter of the century, winter of 44, 45.
And we had problems with frostbite.
Of course, you lived out in dugouts when we were in the Hurtigan Forest, east of Aachen.
So it was all in all not a very pleasant experience at that time.
And your units during some of this time were taking resistance, taking fire, and you were not a combat troop though.
No.
We were non-combat troops in a combat zone.
Exactly.
I used to wonder why I was never visited by some of the battalion people, but they were smart enough to stay back where they were.
But we got a lot of artillery incoming,
during that period after the bulge and until actually around the first part of February when they crossed the Roar River and moved on east.
Right.
But your job was to place these microphones really out in front of the front, exactly.
So you were indeed in the front.
This must have been a rather harrowing ordeal from time to time.
Well, it's the survey crews and the communications people that really caught the brunt of it.
We lost a number of survey men and the communications people, the wire men, had to replace the wire and the microphone because GIs would see those mics and all they had warning signs on them.
no telling what they do to them.
Right.
You got orders to move on to the Elbe River, the Battle of the Bulge here, early 1945.
The bulge was actually over, but your battalion was ordered to the Elbe, and it was something like a 200-mile march.
Is that right?
This was after we had crossed the Rhine.
Right.
About the middle of April, thereabouts.
Yes.
We were sitting after the Battle of the Ruhr,
where so many hundred thousand Germans were captured, we figured the war was about over.
And we didn't have anything to do.
We had a base out, but there wasn't any ranging.
So we figured we were done, you know, sitting there fat, dumb and happy.
Lots of German beer and good food.
Then we got orders to move to the Elbe River.
They pronounce it Elbe, I think.
I don't know why we did, but...
We did a 200-mile march in one day.
We moved by batteries.
And during the march, I was a little bit skeptical because the infantry had not moved nearly that far.
They were still involved in the Ruhr Valley.
Now, about this time, the Americans had met the Russians
down the town was Tobar or Tolgar or something, down below Magdeburg on the Elb River.
That was about the 25th of April.
But we were fired.
We went on our march.
We ran through several groups of Germans and got fired on.
In fact, they tore up one truck and killed
the officer and several enlisted men in the truck.
And at that point, I began to wonder why we were where we were.
But we've been told to go, so when you're in the Army, you go where they tell you to.
Right, right.
The Germans at this time were sort of in a mode of surrender.
They felt that the war was coming to an end.
You didn't know exactly what the mode of the war was for the Russians, so you were all sort of playing the game there, finding out what the Russians were doing, and you thought that your movement to the Elbe River may have something to do with monitoring Russian artillery operations.
Is that right?
When we got to the Elbe about the 25th of April,
The Germans had just started to surrender.
The Elbe at that point is about 40 miles west of Berlin.
And the Russians had just gotten into Berlin and were devastating it.
So the big...
march of Germans trying to surrender came out after we got there to the Elbe.
So, yeah, I think they put us there because they were a little concerned that maybe the Russians... See, we had been given orders not to cross the Elbe.
Yes, sir.
From Eisenhower.
Right.
So they were concerned that maybe the Russians would come into that area, and who knew what they would do?
So we were up there to range on Russian artillery in case they began to move towards the Elbe River.
Right.
There's a couple of stories that you told me that I want to make sure that we tell.
We may not be operating in the right order here, but talk about the...
When you went and the train full of POWs that you sort of escorted back, that was quite a sight that you'll never forget.
There were three train cars, I believe, full of German POWs?
This was while we were still at Cherbourg Peninsula.
Right.
They sent me and another officer and several enlisted men up into Belgium to pick up a train load of German POWs.
And we ended up hauling 50 freight cars full of
Germans, 50 to a car, back to the Cherbourg area.
So that was... That was something that you'll never forget.
But they did get back.
They were prisoners, but they did get back.
December the 16th, you mentioned that date.
You also mentioned that that's sort of a special date because in your mind, three historical things happened on that date.
They did.
What were they?
The first was that the Battle of the Bulge started.
Right.
Second was General Eisenhower got his fifth star.
And third, I was promoted to first lieutenant.
All that happened on December the 16th.
I wasn't on the same orders with General Eisenhower, obviously.
You can find two of those three things in history books, right?
Right.
In your own history, you remember that.
There was an outcome to what you all did as far from sound operation.
And the outcome, I believe you said, was some 65 enemy gun positions were located.
That was our initial location in the Hurtgen Forest.
Right.
We were there for about six weeks.
And during the winter, the worst part of it,
And they told us later, Corps did, that we had located and they had gotten rid of some 65 German gun positions.
Right.
Now I want to go ahead and fast forward back to the Elbe River because when you were here and setting up your command post, you were able to set up a command post that was a little bit more luxurious than the command post that you had seen.
It was a
three-story hunting lodge that belonged to a German baron.
Sort of described this place and sort of the luxury of this place.
It wasn't a bad place to be, and the baron wasn't a bad guy.
He was a nice fellow.
Yes, sir.
It was the finest of any CPs we had the whole time.
Right.
He had been a lieutenant colonel in the German army and was wounded.
Baron Itzenplitz, I believe.
Itzenplitz.
Right.
And was wounded and retired.
His house in Berlin had been destroyed, so they had moved out to this
three-story hunting lodge, which we have a picture of.
Coming up later.
Right.
But as soon as, it was about a half a mile from the Elbe River.
And as soon as I saw it, I told my master sergeant, I said, we're going to end the war right here in luxury.
So he and I went in and talked to the colonel.
He had his family was there.
He had three children, I believe.
Yes, sir.
And he was glad to see us, really.
Right.
We weren't the Russians.
But he moved out to his servant's quarters.
Right.
And gave us the house.
And so we stayed there until...
the war was over and we moved on back into the battalion area.
Before we go to the pictures of some of the artifacts from the war that you brought along with you, I want you to tell one more story.
When you were there, you were just sort of trying to while away your time and you and your buck sergeant, a fellow named Dusty Rhodes, decided to take a little trip.
Talk about what happened on that trip.
Well, I don't know whether I'm proud of it or not, but we did it.
But Dusty and I were up at the river one day and Germans were coming across and my platoon was
unhappy because they hadn't gotten any pistols, any Lugers.
So I told Dusty, I said, let's take one of these rubber boats these Germans come across with and go on across the river and see what we can find.
So just as we got to the other side, the river was about 50 yards wide there, a little car pulled up and four German officers got out.
And I said something like, are you through with your car?
And one of them said,
It sure is glad to hear English again.
He told me he was a doctor, an M.D.
from Brooklyn who had gone back to Germany apparently early in the war and got stuck there and spent the whole time in the war.
That was his story.
I should have gotten his name, but they were in a hurry to go on west.
So we got in the car, turned it around and headed east and leisurely driving along.
It was a nice day.
Nothing happening.
Nobody around.
And Dusty said, Lieutenant, we're not going to clear to Berlin, are we?
And I said, I don't think so.
We'd driven maybe 10 or 15 minutes.
And about that time, here comes three great big German trucks, enormous, with steak bodies full of German soldiers, probably 50 in each truck, just jammed in, you know, to get away.
So I got out, stopped the car, and got out and held my hand up.
and said, halt.
I said, throw all of your weapons over here on the side and go on up to the river and surrender.
And I guess we were the first GIs these fellows had seen.
So not a peep out of any of them.
They threw the guns over and belts and took off.
So we hung the pistols on the belts and turned the car around and went back to the river.
You said you counted some 175 pistols that you got out of that.
So what did you think when you got out of your car and held your hand up to these three trucks full?
I mean, the war was still going on.
Oh, I know it.
It worked out good, didn't it?
I'm really not honored to have been there, but it was a dubious distinction maybe.
That's right.
And you think that because of that, even though...
you didn't know whether you were supposed to have been on the other side of the river, that quite possibly you and Sergeant Rhodes may have gotten the closest to Berlin of anybody in the war on the ground, right?
On the ground.
I didn't publicize what I had done because we had orders not to cross the L. Exactly.
But you weren't in a combat boat.
We weren't attacking anybody.
Right, right.
Let's go to some photographs, and then we've got some artifacts here that you brought back from the war.
Let's go to a few photographs that Captain Roop, here you are.
You can look right over there on that monitor right there, and you can tell us about where are you there.
Well, that was somewhere in Germany, Tom, but I'm not sure it was where I had a CP command post.
Right.
And it must have been in the spring because I didn't have many heavy jackets on.
Exactly.
Okay, let's move on to the next photograph.
Now, here's the hunting lodge.
That's the Barron's hunting lodge.
And your command post, I think you said, what, second floor of the right three windows?
well the command post was all the second floor all the second floor and uh we it was large enough that uh the whole platoon lived in there exactly lived in and the third floor was a big ballroom yes sir that they had stored a lot of stuff in right no damage whatsoever it was a beautiful place probably built back in the middle 1800s we've got a picture coming up of the uh
of the Baron.
There he is.
There's Baron Itzenplitz.
That's him wearing the uniform that we're going to see here.
We're going to see this uniform.
We're going to get a close-up of this uniform that you're seeing right here.
We have in the studio today and the hat and the belt.
Everything but the pants.
I wonder what happened to the pants.
They got lost.
And the boots, as a matter of fact.
We have those in the studio.
Right.
Okay.
Quite a distinct...
Talk about this.
I think people, anybody that saw the movie The Longest Day and remember the character that was played by Red Buttons, I believe, in that movie will remember this scene.
This is actually what it looks like today, I guess.
What is that?
Three years ago, my two sons and I went back to France and spent a week on the Normandy Peninsula.
And this church is in St.
Mary Glees, which is the nearest little town to Omaha Beach.
And it was the first town that was
gotten to by the gis right uh this is an effigy that they keep hanging there to uh commemorate the d-day right uh parachute drum right and that was depicted in that movie uh that's well a part by red button so i believe just passed away this last year the actor did played a part in that movie that's pretty fascinating okay let's uh move on i think we've got a couple of others
These are German POWs that are surrendering.
Where is this one taken?
This is at the Elbe, where I had my CP close by.
The bridge had been blown, of course.
So they used rubber boats and anything they could find to get on across.
In a 10-day period there, they said that something like a million Germans surrendered, getting away from the Russians.
Okay, I think we've got, and here is your unit, and you are sitting in the middle center.
That's my sound platoon, made up of the survey people and the communications people and the CP personnel, command post personnel.
Wasn't a very large unit.
That was the A unit, right?
That was A battery.
A battery.
Sound.
Right.
Yes.
Fascinating pictures.
And we have some fascinating things.
We talked about the uniform.
And as a matter of fact, the uniform is right here to the side of you.
We're going to go ahead and take a closer look at that and sort of describe what we're looking at.
This is the Baron's uniform.
How did it come by that he just handed it over to you?
I think he was so glad to see us that we hadn't.
destroyed anything of his.
And I think he also felt that he ultimately would end up in the Russian zone, which he did.
It had been petitioned, but it hadn't been announced that this area he was in would be in the right.
So maybe he just wanted to save it or see that somebody got it that would treasure it.
Right.
So that's briefly it.
That's obviously a piece of history that you have that you treasure.
Let's move on what I'm holding up here.
Talk about this helmet.
And you can see right now the detail, the intricacy here.
of what we're showing here.
Talk about this helmet.
The Baron gave you this, right?
Yes.
That's the spike helmet that German officers wore up through and including World War I. Now, I presume this had belonged to someone in his family because he had it.
And that's the old.
That was made.
Turn it around.
It says inside that it was made in September of 1909.
Wow.
That was the date of manufacture.
Wow, that is incredible.
I've got to hold up a couple other things.
You just keep these things in your home, is that right?
I've given them all to my son.
I see.
But he keeps them, yes.
Yeah, I see.
You can take that off of that if you want to.
What we're about to get a close-up on here is a German Luger.
Here we go.
Now, this didn't come from the Baron.
Tell me how you came by this.
That was on a German lieutenant colonel up on the Elbe River one day who was standing there directing his troops across.
And I didn't have a good Luger, and I figured that might be good, so he gave it to me.
after I had asked him for it.
This is quite a piece.
How long were you overseas altogether?
Almost a year.
I'm going to reach over here and got some other things.
This is a helmet, another item that was given to you by the Baron.
We're going to get focused in on this, and here we go.
There's a close-up of the...
the swastika on the side of it, and we will pan out.
Talk about this helmet.
He gave this to you.
This belonged to him, I guess?
I don't know, but that's where it was, yes.
People see these in movies and documentaries about World War II.
I just find it incredible that I'm actually holding one.
On the other side, there's another insignia here.
I'm going to go ahead and move here into the shot.
And here we have another chance as I'm putting these up.
This is a... I'm going to let you sort of describe this.
What am I holding here?
It's an SS dress dagger.
The SS troops used them.
I don't have the scabbard for it.
I never did, but it was part of a dress uniform.
Right.
Incredible.
And I can't read the German, but there is a... You know what it says here on the blade?
I'm not sure exactly.
I'll hand it over to you.
Everything for Germany.
Alles für Deutschland.
All for Germany.
Right.
This eagle on the handle has a small swastika there.
One other item that folks will definitely recognize.
I guess this was given to you by the Baron.
This is an authentic Nazi armband.
Mm-hmm.
And the Baron gave you this, is that right?
So this is the one that he wore.
Could be.
Yep.
Wow.
When you think about the war and you think about
Hitler and what he stood for and what we were fighting against and all that.
You look at these as just artifacts of sort of the memory of the victory of the allies.
And when you personally look at these things and look at what they represent and the other side, what are sort of the thoughts that come to mind as a person who fought the war?
Well, now it's been so long I can do it dispassionately.
But for a long time, I was wrapped up in the emotions of the whole thing because it's an experience that once you go through, and mine was not nearly as bad as a lot of people because I lived through it.
Yes, sir.
It's something that...
that's with you.
Absolutely.
Thank you very much for being with us, for bringing these items.
It's just absolutely incredible.
Of course, I know that you're very proud of your family.
You have two sons, another son who sadly passed away a few years ago.
You lost your wife, Louise, in 1998, but you have eight grandchildren that I know that you're very, very proud of and very, very proud in your retirement.
And I thank you very, very much for being with us and mainly
Thank you for your service, Captain Roop.
You're entirely welcome.
I appreciate it.
Thank you.
There were so many elements of World War II that if you were not familiar with Sound and Flash and how it helped the Allies win the war, well, now you know from a soldier who did his dangerous duty and came home to tell the story.
We salute Captain Gerald Roop and all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.